# 2021-07-21 - Attempts to update RIS3 data model with a new view

## What

A request to update the RIS3 map with a new set of tiles and a new view linking to these tiles.

In theory this is one of the simplest updates we can make to a map. There are no labels to process, so all we need to do is generate the tiles from the PDF file provided, upload them to a location in AWS, and then update the transform data to add a new view that links through to the AWS bucket.

Mark N jumped in to handle the tile generation and upload using an AI-native method rather than the usual shell script (for reasons that I will go into shortly), so all I had to worry about was adding a dozen or so triples with the properties required for the new view. This still took the better part of **three hours**, and I am documenting why in the hope that we can address the various issues I found along the way fairly soon-ish.

## Why

RIS3 contains many different tilesets illustrating different systems and concepts. Unlike other maps where tilesets are associated with views, RIS3 associates them with stories and storypoints. Operationally these work much the same way as views, with some additional functionality where storypoints can connect to one another and a user can be guided from one set of tiles to another, and conceptually adding a new story/storypoint combination for the new tileset is no more complicated than adding a new view would be for another map.

### Update attempt 1

There is a transform called `ris3_views` that contains all of the data required to construct story and storypoint triples. It was erroneously assumed that adding a story and storypoint for the new tileset into this transform and rerunning it on top of the existing data model from staging would be all that was required.

Unfortunately RIS3 appears to have diverged significantly from the existing process. There is a second file called `ris3_points.ttl` which is a turtle-format representation of the graph constructed by the triples from `ris3_views`. This contains manual adjustments to the source data from `ris3_views`, including geopoint data and updated tileset versions for specific storypoints. Having a second file involved in storypoint generation makes the update process very unclear: 
- Which file do I update? Do I update both of them? 
- `ris3_views` assumes there is one common version datestamp across all tilesets. If I want to add a different version for the tileset for my new storypoint, there is no easy way of doing this short of including the specific tileset version on *every* storypoint.
- `ris3_points.ttl` only contains data for storypoints. Are story objects necessary, and if so how and where do I add one? In `ris3_views`?
- What happens if I run `ris3_views` at the same time as `--add-graph ris3_points.ttl`, which would add both of them to the model?

### Update attempt 2

After some investigation of the data in `ris3_views.py` and `ris3_points.ttl` I decided that attempting to the run them together was probably not a good idea. So I came up with a different approach: while the source data in `ris3_views.py` is out of date, it should still work for generating new triples for the new tileset. These can then be displayed as part of a turtle-format graph, and the output for the specific storypoint that I want to add can be copied into `ris3_points.ttl` which can then be added to the existing model.

However, this approach also quickly proved problematic:
- The storypoints in `ris3_points.ttl` have an `asOrdinal` property that is, as far as I can tell, completely undocumented. (It certainly doesn't appear anywhere in `sm_platform`.) It appears to be a simple incrementing counter, but since I was inserting new data into the sequence by adding my new storypoint there was the potential that I might overlap with existing `asOrdinal` values that were already encoded in `ris3_points.ttl`.
- Running sheet-to-triples with just the `--add-graph ris3_points.ttl` argument and no transforms means it doesn't write anything to file -- a transform needs to be passed to do this. 
- I hacked the run file to force it to always write to file, but the verbose output indicated that it was dropping far fewer triples as duplicates than expected (it should have dropped the entire file except for my new storypoint). Further investigation revealed that **the model pulled from staging was pointed at tilesets that were more recent than those versioned in `ris3_points.ttl`**.

This last point meant that updating RIS3 using any code-based approach was impossible, because doing so relied on a versioned `ris3_points.ttl` that was out-of-date compared to whatever unversioned `ris3_points.ttl` had been used to generate the existing model data. Using the older copy would have undone newer changes with no way to recover them.

### Update attempt 3

The storypoint was eventually created using the following incredibly brittle method:

- Add the new storypoint into `ris3_views.py` and run this transform only to generate the triples for the storypoint.
- Open the triples json and find and copy only the new triples.
- Open the model pulled down from staging and paste the new triples into it, after making sure that `asOrdinal` wasn't going to collide with any existing values.
- Also edit the markdown for the sidebar in the model to add a link to the new storypoint.
- Push the model back up to staging.

(This involved a lot of direct editing of a 2.5MB slab of JSON representing the model, which caused Visual Studio Code to crash twice.)

Obviously I have compounded the original problem here by adding even more unversioned data to the model -- although I have made a PR with an update to `ris3_views`, the generated triples will have the wrong tileset version as there's no good way of setting this on a per-storypoint level yet. Even if there was, though, `ris3_views` is still out-of-sync with `ris3_points.ttl`.

### A note on tile generation

Tile generation from PDFs is usually done On Martin's Computer using a shell script. These shell scripts are undocumented; Martin provided one for RIS3 prior to going on holiday but it started with a huge array of commented-out variables (presumably corresponding to the different tilesets for RIS3) that made things generally rather impenetrable. Now that I have gone through this learning process I *think* I could probably use this to generate some tiles, but when looking at it from the other end it was much easier to let Mark N do it as he knew the AI-native method would work.

## Actions

### Immediate (now)

- **Locate the copy of `ris3_points.ttl` was used to generate the existing model on staging and prod and version it.** All code that is used to generate production data should be versioned so that the production data can be reconstructed from scratch if need be.

### Near future (2-4 weeks)

- Backport the manual data edits from `ris3_points.ttl` into `ris3_views.py`.
- Give `ris3_views.py` the ability to set specific tileset versions per storypoint (may require some additional functionality in `sheet-to-triples`).
- Once `ris3_points.ttl` can be recreated by running `ris3_views.py`, delete `ris3_points.ttl`.
- Document the correct process for updating the RIS3 data model as a first step towards better documentation the map update process across all maps.
- AL to do the tile generation himself at least once so that he understands how it works.
- Version tile generation scripts.
